NAT Instance Configuration for Private EC2 Internet Access

Objective

Provide internet access to the EC2 instance running in the private subnet by configuring a NAT Instance instead of a NAT Gateway. The private EC2 instance is configured to upload a test file to the S3 bucket nautilus-nat-23933. Successful upload confirms outbound internet connectivity.

Existing Resources

VPC Name: nautilus-priv-vpc

Private Subnet: nautilus-priv-subnet

Private EC2 Instance: nautilus-priv-ec2

S3 Bucket: nautilus-nat-23933

Implementation Steps

1. Created Public Subnet

A new public subnet named nautilus-pub-subnet was created within the existing VPC nautilus-priv-vpc.

The subnet was configured to automatically assign public IPv4 addresses to instances launched within it.

The associated route table was configured with a default route to the Internet Gateway, making the subnet publicly accessible.

2. Launched NAT Instance

An EC2 instance named nautilus-nat-instance was launched in the public subnet using the Amazon Linux 2023 AMI.

A custom security group was created and attached to the instance.

The instance was assigned a public IPv4 address to enable internet connectivity.

3. Disabled Source/Destination Check

Source/Destination Check was disabled on the NAT instance.

This allows the instance to forward traffic on behalf of other instances in the VPC, which is required for NAT functionality.

4. Enabled IP Forwarding

Verified the current IP forwarding status:

cat /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward

Output:

0

Enabled IP forwarding:

sudo sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_forward=1

Verification:

cat /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward

Output:

1

5. Made IP Forwarding Persistent

Updated the system configuration file:

/etc/sysctl.conf

Added the following entry:

net.ipv4.ip_forward = 1

This ensures IP forwarding remains enabled after system reboot.

6. Installed iptables

Verified that iptables was not installed by default on Amazon Linux 2023.

Installed iptables using:

sudo dnf install -y iptables-services

Verified successful installation:

iptables --version

Output:

iptables v1.8.8 (nf_tables)

7. Identified Network Parameters

Network Interface: ens5

Private Subnet CIDR: 10.1.1.0/24

8. Configured NAT Masquerading

Added the NAT rule:

sudo iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -s 10.1.1.0/24 -o ens5 -j MASQUERADE

Verified the rule using:

sudo iptables -t nat -L -n -v

The MASQUERADE entry was successfully added for the private subnet.

9. Configured Forwarding Rules

Added outbound forwarding rule:

sudo iptables -A FORWARD -s 10.1.1.0/24 -o ens5 -j ACCEPT

Added return traffic rule:

sudo iptables -A FORWARD -d 10.1.1.0/24 -m state --state ESTABLISHED,RELATED -i ens5 -j ACCEPT

Verified both rules using:

sudo iptables -L -n -v

Current Status

The NAT instance has been fully configured with:

Public IP address

Custom security group

Source/Destination Check disabled

IP forwarding enabled

iptables installed

NAT and forwarding rules configured

Pending Activity

Update the route table associated with nautilus-priv-subnet.

Configure the default route:

Destination: 0.0.0.0/0

Target: nautilus-nat-instance

Validation

After updating the private subnet route table:

Wait for the scheduled cron job on nautilus-priv-ec2 to execute.

Verify that the file nautilus-test.txt is uploaded to the S3 bucket nautilus-nat-23933.

Successful upload confirms that outbound internet access from the private subnet is functioning through the NAT instance.
